# Multivariate data visualization using glyphs on a geospatial map: A case study analysis on car accident data in the US

# Abstract <br>
Geospatial data is generated on a large scale daily, and each geographical point defined by latitude and longitude has several dimensions and attributes associated with it. Given the number of possible correlations between the attributes, the data exploration procedure in such a case is quite challenging. number of dimensions in the data increases the complexity. As a result, to aid in this type of data visualization, we have created a dashboard that displays multivariate data on a choropleth using several types of glyphs. The primary purpose of this study is to determine the number of visual encodings that can be placed on a glyph to aid in the sensemaking process.To do this, we conducted a case study using car accident data from the United States, and parameters such as time of day, accident severity, and weather condition are represented as glyphs on the geospatial map. The case study intends to help the corresponding government authorities identify the reasons that cause accidents, allowing them to gain insights into how to prevent such situations in the future. The evaluation study also offers details about the encodings that are appropriate for multivariate data processing.

# Technology used: <br>
Python for data cleaning, Bokeh library to prototype the glyphs on a choropleth, Tableau for creation of dashboard, Tableau server for deployment. 

# Introduction: <br>
The type of representation of data that has geographical factors in it is known as geospatial data. Visualizing such kind of geospatial data is known as geospatial visualization. Such visualizations are of great interest to a broad audience for several purposes. For example, data visualizations about a particular region’s weather can help metrologists make an informed decision about forecasting. However, most current visualization techniques focus on representing each factor of such data using single-dimensional shapes called glyphs. These glyphs, sometimes called icons, are graphic objects that use size, shape, and colour to represent one or more data values. Such glyphs can be as simple as a circle or a square to something as complex as a bar chart or a sunburst chart. However, as discussed before, most of the current geospatial systems still do not fully utilize all dimensions of the glyphs, as each of the glyphs represents only one geospatial data entity. In connection to a geospatial data variable, choropleth maps show separated geographic areas or regions that are coloured, shaded, or patterned. This offers a method for visualizing data throughout a region, which might reveal variations or trends within the space depicted. The data variable represents itself in each map area using a colour progression. Typically, this might be a transition from one colour to another, a progression of just one hue, from transparent to opaque, from bright to dark, or the full gamut of colours. This research work focuses on the ability to combine these two representations (choropleth maps and multi-dimensional glyphs) into a single representation by exploring the placement of multi-dimensional glyphs on a choropleth map where each dimension of the glyph, such as size, colour, shape, motion will represent a different entity of the geospatial dataset. Such representation will help the users to correlate multiple factors related to the exact geographical location with the same glyph, thus eliminating the requirement to visualize multiple choropleth maps and observe the correlations manually. However, when using multi-dimensional glyphs, there must be a limit to the number of dimensions. It is logical that as the number of dimensions increases, the complexity of the representation of such glyphs increases with it too. Therefore, the core objective of this study is to find this limit and the set of encodings that are more visually sensemaking than others. To achieve this objective, we first explored the current work in this research field, formed our design thesis based on this conducted survey, then implemented the proposed thesis on a data problem involving US Accidents data as a case study and performed a user evaluation to identify the limit on dimensions and set of encodings. The data contain attributes such as time of accident, severity, weather condition, and the year of accident occurrence plotted against the frequency of accidents occurring in the corresponding state. This is integrated on a visualization dashboard which uses encodings such shape, colour, size, motion and angle and position.

# Project Link: <br>
[Choropleth Visualization Dashboard](https://infoviz-choropleth.w3spaces.com/)

# Evaluation Results: 
We performed a user study as the evaluation method for our research work. A total of 36 participants volunteered to participate in the user study. 30 of them were associated with University of Florida and 6 are based in India. The age of the participants ranged from 22 to 30 years. 8 of the participants had previous experience of working in the Data Analytics field, however none of them had any experience dealing with multi-dimensional glyphs. All the participants were asked about their proficiency in dealing with visualizations and whether they had any idea about what choropleths are.

We studied the efficiency of visualizations by asking the participants to perform three different tasks with the help of our developed system. At the start of the session, the participants were briefed about the visualization and purpose of study, they were also given a short walkthrough about how to use the dashboard. The first task involved identifying the state with the highest number of accidents per capita during day time. For this task, the users were expected to look at the dimensions representing population and categorical distribution of time of the accident. For the second task, the participants were asked to identify the month in which Texas had highest number of accidents with very high severity. To complete this task, the users were supposed to observe the combination of motion (to identify time) and color (to identify no. of accidents classified with severity as very high). The third task , participants were asked to identify which weather conditions are considered to be of a higher risk to travel in the state of Florida. To complete this task, the users were expected to select the bar chart view and observe combination of length and color to correctly identify the answer the User Interface of the dashboard to be user-friendly. Few of the participants also gave additional feedback about which aspects of multidimensional glyphs they found more useful. Overall, based on the evaluation, we concluded that the addition of multi-dimensionality in glyphs positively affected the visualization.
